
dvb sis published in aug 2018 as etsi ts 103 615, allows for terrestrial retransmission of signal
addressing dth satellit receivers. sis tstands for single illumination system, referring to the fact that
a single satellite beam can be used simultaneoursly for dth and to feed terrestrial networks

since the standard has been designed in a generic way, the satellite/terrestrial use case is just one
possibility; in the future other use case could be realized using dvb-sis, e.g a cable/terrestrial
combination. the common denominator for all use cases is the deployment of mpeg-2 transport streams.

the dvb-sis concept consists in deriving content and metadata from one delivery path (e.g satellite)
for re-delivery via another path (e.g terrestrial). the video content for both paths is assembled into a
single transport stream at a so called parent site and broadcasted on the single network path; the
video content for the other path is derived at the so called daughter sites.

1. we need to program low level transport streams processing in compliancy with the standard
2. you will create api for web control
3. you need to understand dvb sis standard
4. csg is generating metadata - timing & framing and other info which tells dsa's
5. how to generate dvb-t or dvb-t2 signals from incoming one or more satellite tv streams
6. main instrument dsa use is time-stamping of incoming packets from satellite tv streams
7. according to epoch timestamps and metadata from csg dsa's are able to deterministically multiplex 
   new regional mpeg streams framed either to dvb-t or dvb-t2
8. c# for api web control can be replaced with ts duck written in c++
9. dvb-t and t2 is easier to understand from the book which is on readme
10. dsaci is using xml, yes it is metadata stream from csg

we will decide later what will be done in which programming language.
first is understanding of requirements




the digital video broadcasting project (dvb) is an industry-led consortium of broadcasters, manufacturers
network operators, software developers, regulatory bodies, content owners and other committed to designing
global standards for the delivery of digital television and data services. dvb fosters market driven so
lutions that meet the needs and economic circumtances of broadcast industry stakeholders and consumers.
dvb standards cover all aspects of digital television from transmission through interfacing, conditional
access and interactivity for digital videl, audio and data. the consortium came together in 1993 to pro
vide global standardisation, interoperability and future proof specification.

1. scope
the present document describes the single illumination system, which allows to deliver parent signals
for direct reception by consumer receivers and at, at the same time, for a deterministic generation of
daughter streams for terrestrial retransmission. parent signals can be provided to the daughter site via 
all defined ts-based dvb means - be it satellite, cable or terrestrial. metadata may be provided as part
of the parent signals (called "in-band" in the present document). part of the metadata may also be
provided "out-of-band".

a typical use case is described by the present document and is based on satellit broadcast signals on 
parent side - be it dvb-s (etsi en 300 421 [8]), 
                      -s2 (etse en 302 307-1 [9] or
                     -s2x (etse en 302 307-2 [10]
that are addressing consumer direct-to-home (dth) receivers and terrestrial transmitter on daughter side
in parellel. for terrestrial retransmission of the whole or partial content, the dth signals of mpeg-2 ts
format(iso/eic 13818-1 [5]) from one or several satellite can be used and services and service components
can be selected according to terrestrial broadcasters needs. also other non-satellite parent signals and
out-of-band metadata feeds can be integrated into the preparation of the terrestrial 
dvb-t2, etsi en 302 755 [2], and/or
dvb-t,  etsi en 300 744 [3] signals on daughter site. single frequency network (sfn) operation of the 
terrestrial networks driver by the single illumination system is enabled.

2. references
[1] etsi ts 102 773 - digital video broadcasting (dvb); modulator interface (t2-mi) for a second
   generation digital terrestrial television broadcasting system (dvb-t2)

[2] ETSI EN 302 755: "Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB); Frame structure channel coding and 
modulation for a second generation digital terrestrial television broadcasting system (DVB-T2)". 

[3] ETSI EN 300 744: "Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB); Framing structure, channel coding and 
modulation for digital terrestrial television". 

[4] ETSI TS 101 191: "Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB); DVB mega-frame for Single Frequency 
Network (SFN) synchronization". 

[5] ISO/IEC 13818-1: "Information technology - Generic coding of moving pictures and associated 
audio information: Systems". 

[6] ETSI EN 300 468: "Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB); Specification for Service Information (SI) 
in DVB systems". 

[7] ETSI TS 102 034: "Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB); Transport of MPEG-2 TS Based DVB 
Services over IP Based Networks". 

[8] ETSI EN 300 421: "Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB); Framing structure, channel coding and 
modulation for 11/12 GHz satellite services". 

[9] ETSI EN 302 307-1: "Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB); Second generation framing structure, 
channel coding and modulation systems for Broadcasting, Interactive Services, News Gathering 
and other broadband satellite applications; Part 1: DVB-S2". 

[10] ETSI EN 302 307-2: "Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB); Second generation framing structure, 
channel coding and modulation systems for Broadcasting, Interactive Services, News Gathering 
and other broadband satellite applications; Part 2: DVB-S2 Extensions (DVB-S2X)".
 
[11] IETF RFC 3629 (STD 63) (November 2003): "UTF-8, a transformation format of ISO 10646", 
F. Yergeau. 

3. definition, symbols and abbreviations

control stream generator - device that generates metadata, namely framing and timing information (f&ti),
dsa configuration information (dsaci) and layer 1 signallin - for the daughter site signal

daughter site adapter - device that creates the tmf/t2-mi streams to be output to the related dvb-t or
-t2 modulators - based on the metadata it receives from the csg, the outputs streams consist of content
received from the parent side.

dsa configuration informaion - information that enables deterministic generation of dvb-t2-mi and/or
dvb-t-mega-frame streams at the output of the daughter site adapter.

F&TI packet: TS packet used for F&TI signalling in the DVB-T case 

in-band: part of one of the Parent Signals 

interleaving frame: unit over which dynamic capacity allocation for a particular PLP is carried out, made up of an 
integer, dynamically varying number of FEC blocks and having a fixed relationship to the T2-frames 

layer 1 signalling: metadata that describes the physical layer configuration 
NOTE: In the DVB-T2 case the L1 signalling provides the receiver with a means to access physical layer pipes 
within the T2-frames; for further details see ETSI EN 300 744 [3] for DVB-T and ETSI EN 302 755 [2] 
for DVB-T2.

layer 2 signalling: equivalent to PSI/SI - see ISO/IEC 13818-1 [5] and ETSI EN 300 468 [6], respectively - since the 
present document covers Transport Streams (ISO/IEC 13818-1 [5]) only, layer 2 metadata that describes the service 
configuration of the tuned and optionally of other multiplexes 
mode adaptation: applicable to DVB-T2 only: the mode adaptation modules, which operate separately on the contents 
of each PLP, slice the input data stream into data fields which, after stream adaptation, will form baseband frames 
(BBFRAMEs), see also ETSI EN 302 755 [2] 
out-of-band: not part of any of the Parent Signals, but provided to the DSA by other means 
parent network: any DVB- and TS-based delivery network carrying the parent signal. This can be a satellite, cable or 
terrestrial network 
parent signal: transport Stream present at the DSA input providing some or all the services used to build the output 
DTT stream 

NOTE: There may be one or several Parent Signal(s) contributing to the output DTT stream (T2-MI stream or 
stream of T-mega-frames). Each Parent Signal consists of a time reference of the SIS system clock 
(PCRabs). 
PCR_base: 90 kHz clock 
primary sis service: primary SIS service (one per terrestrial output/per current_DSA_group_id) consists of the listed 
mandatory elements and can consist of the listed optional elements: 
• PCRabs using the transport packet adaptation mechanism (see ISO/IEC 13818-1 [5]) on a PID that is designated 
as the PCR_PID in the PMT (mandatory) 
• F&TI, which may be sent on the PCRabs PID (mandatory) 
• DSACI (optional) 
• Terrestrial-only PSI/SI tables belonging to hybrid or sheer terrestrial services, including PATs (for terrestrial 
TSs, with PID ≠ 0016) and PMTs (all optional) 

reference transport stream: reference transport stream (RTS) is a transport stream made up entirely of null packets 
(see ISO/IEC 13818-1 [5]) but with a defined timing in terms of the SIS reference clock. Each packet has an associated 
PCRabs value 
service information: service information is the layer 2 signalling specific to DVB usage of transport streams and 
consists of the MPEG programme service information and the DVB service information 
SIS service: SIS service (one per parent signal) consists of the listed mandatory elements and can consist of the listed 
optional elements: 
• PCRabs using the transport packet adaptation mechanism (see ISO/IEC 13818-1 [5]) on a PID that is designated 
as the PCR_PID in the PMT (mandatory) 
• F&TI, which may be sent on the PCRabs PID (optional) 
• DSACI (optional) 
• Terrestrial-only PSI/SI tables belonging to hybrid or sheer terrestrial services, including PATs (for terrestrial 
TSs, with PID ≠ 0016) and PMTs (all optional) 

SIS system clock: 27 MHz clock that has an active edge at the SIS epoch and executes exactly 27,000,000 cycles in 
every subsequent second of UTC 
SIS epoch: epoch for DVB-T2 time, i.e. 2000-01-01 T 00:00:00 UTC

T2-frame: fixed physical layer TDM frame that is further divided into variable size sub-slices 
NOTE: The T2-frame starts with one P1 and one or multiple P2 symbols. 
T2-MI stream: stream of T2-MI packets carrying the T2 data for a single T2 profile and optionally any non-profile 
data with a given value of T2-MI stream ID 


4. digital video broadcasting (dvb) single illumination system (sis) definition
system overview and arch
the target is, on the other hand, to feed receivers installed at consumer's household with a "Parent"
signal suitable for direct reception and, on the other hand, to use the same signal to derive services 
and service components for terrestrial re-transmission. the parent signal might typically be uplinked
via:
 dvb-s (etsi en 300 421 [8]
   -s2 (etsi en 302 307 - 1 [9]) or
   s2x (etse en 302 307 - 2 [10] to
  a satellite

the terrestrial multiplexes could either by  
 dvb-t2 or dvb-t multiplex and shall be suitable for use in sfn networks

central functional blocks on the parent site are the control stream generator (csg) and the transport
stream multiplexer that prepares the ts (iso/iec 13818-1 [5]) that is transmitted to consumers. the
csg prepares all metadata that is not layer 2 signalling (psi/si), i.e the layer 1 signalling, the 
framing & timing information (f&ti) as well as the dsa configuration information (dsaci).

the csg obtains instruction from its control interface (man-machine interface, etc) for the configuration
of the:
 dvb-t2 (etsi en 302 755 [2]) and/or 
 dvb-t  (etsi en 300 744 [3]) transmission frames that its counter-part on the dauther site, the daugther
site adapter (dsa) receives parent signal from one or more dvb networks and extracts services and service
components for terrestrial re-transmission. that selection is determined by the dsa configuration informa
tion (dsaci). the latter also provides instruction to the dsa for the preparation of the terrestrial psi/
si. in the t2 case, layer 1 signalling is only decapsulated and inserted into the output t2-mi stream.
framing & timing information indicates frame boundaries - in the t2 case the boundaries between interlea
ving frames and in the t case the boundaries between t mega-frames. the latter signals are output by the
dsa to the related modulators.