etsi en 302 307-2 

introduction
the optional extension of the s2 system have been approved in 2014 and are
identified by the s2x denomination. such extension are non-backwards-compatible
with etsi en 302 307 [4], are optional for the implementation of new receivers
under etsi en 302 307-1 [3], but are normative for the implementation of receivers
under the present document: remapping of specific s2x building blocks to application
areas is specified in table 1. for every s2x application area, as defined in
table 1, the configuration for the corresponding s2 application area, as defined
in etsi en 302 307-1 [3], table 1, will be implemented. in case of conflicts the
definition of the s2x application area applies.

the present document targets the core application areas of s2 (digital video 
broadcasting, forward link for interactive services using ACM, digital satallite
news gathering and professional digital links such as video point-to-point or
internet trunking links), and new application areas requiring very-low carrier-
to-noise and carrier-to-interference operation (vl-snr)

in particular for dth, a possible use case is the launch of uhdtv-1 (e.g 4k)
television services in Ku-/Ka-band that will adopt HEVC encoding. in this context 
it may be desirable to eventually use fragments of smaller blocks of capacity
on two or three DTH transponders and bond them into one logical stream. this 
permits to maximise capacity exploitation by avoiding the presence of space
capacity in individual transponders and/or to take maximum advantage of statistical
multiplexing.

the s2x system offers the ability to operate with very low carrier-to-noise and
carrier-to-interference ratios (SNR down to -10db), to serve market such as 
airborne (business jets), maritime, civil aviation internet access, vsat terminal
at higher frequency ranges or in tropical zones, small portable terminals for
journalists and other professionals. furthermore, the s2x system provides transmission
modes offering significantly higher capacity and efficiency to serve professional links
characterized by very-high carrier-to-noise and carrier-to-interference ratios
condition.

the present document reuses the s2, system architecture, while adding fines
modcod steps, sharper roll-off filtering, technical means for bonding of multiple
transponders and additional signalling capacity by means of an optional periodic
super-fram structure, extended plheader signalling schemes and the support of
dse-lite signals.

the present document maintains the same clause number as etsi en 302 307-1 [3]
in order to facilitate cross-reference.